🚀 Release 0.10.0. Release notes update. (#1038)
choderalab/perses: docs/changelog.rst

0.10.0 - Release
----------------

New command line interface (CLI), many enhancements for the API (specially the ``PointMutationExecutor``) and improved testing.

Bugfixes
^^^^^^^^

> - Bug in geometry engine when could not generate a successful topology -- fixed by not trying to access it when its ``None``. (`#855 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/855>`_)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Bug in geometry engine when `topology_index_map` is None -- fixed by not trying to access it when its ``None``. (`#855 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/855>`_)
```

Reviewer: Why are there so many underscores? For example there is one after the link to the PR in this line.

- Bug generated by changes upstream in the ``openmm`` package -- fixed by adding more padding to the simulation box, it is now 1.1 nm. Openmm issue `#3502 <https://github.com/openmm/openmm/issues/3502>`_. Perses issue `#949 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/issues/949>`_ (`#953 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/953>`_)
- Fixed energy bookkeeping in test of ``HybridTopologyFactory`` when a ring amino acid is involved in transformation. (`#969 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/969>`_)
- Avoid changing the global context cache behavior on module imports. Issue `#968 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/issues/968>`_ (`#977 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/977>`_).
- Benchmark free energy plots now shift data to experimental mean. (`#981 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/981>`_)
- Recovered logging capabilities respecting the ``LOGLEVEL`` environment variable. Issue `#1018 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/issues/1018>`_ (`#1032 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/1032>`_).

Enhancements
^^^^^^^^^^^^
- Improved continuous integration (CI) performance. (`#961 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/961>`_)

> - ``PointMutationExecutor`` now accepts both solute and solvated PDBs. (`#967 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/967>`_)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``PointMutationExecutor`` now accepts both solute and solvated PDBs (previously only accepted solute PDBs). (`#967 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/967>`_)
```

- Tests and examples are now using ``openff-2.0.0`` force field instead of ``openff-1.0.0``. (`#971 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/971>`_)

> - Use names for fetching the force components of a system, avoiding issues with indices reordering upstream in ``openmm``. Issue `#993 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/issues/993>`_ (`#976 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/976>`_ and `#1007 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/1007>`_)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use names (instead of indices) for fetching the force components of a system, avoiding issues with force reordering upstream in ``openmm``. Issue `#993 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/issues/993>`_ (`#976 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/976>`_ and `#1007 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/1007>`_)
```

- Increase stability of simulations by decreasing the default hydrogen mass to 3 amu. Issue `#982 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/issues/982>`_ (`#983 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/983>`_).
- Improved CI tests on both CPU and GPU (`#985 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/985>`_ `#989 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/989>`_ `#1012 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/1012>`_)

> - ``PointMutationExecutor`` now raises an error if an invalid phase is specified (`#991 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/991>`_).

Reviewer: I think we should move this bullet point to the "Bug Fixes" section, since this PR introduces the phase check, but a later PR (#1024) actually removes it. The primary changes that this PR introduces are actually 1) skipping counterion for the vacuum phase and 2) fixing a typo in one of the tests. 

Maybe something like:
```
- Skip introduction of counterion for charge changing mutations in vacuum and fix typo in the phase name in `test_resume_protein_mutation_no_checkpoint` (`#991 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/991>`_).
```

> - Performance increase when retrieving hybrid positions. Issue `#1005 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/issues/1005>`_ (`#1020 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/1020>`_)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Performance increase when retrieving the old or new positions from the hybrid positions. Issue `#1005 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/issues/1005>`_ (`#1020 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/1020>`_)
```

- Use of unique names for force components in ``HybridTopologyFactory`` (`#1022 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/1022>`_).
- New function ``create_endstates_from_real_systems()`` for creating unsampled endstates for currently supported hybrid topology factories (`#1023 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/1023>`_).

> - Improve the readability and usability of ``PointMutationExecutor`` (`#1024 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/1024>`_).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Improve the readability and usability of ``PointMutationExecutor`` and updates how parameters are specified for solvation (`#1024 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/1024>`_).
```

New features
^^^^^^^^^^^^

> - Introduce ``RESTCapableHybridTopologyFactory``. Topology factory that handles REST scaling, alchemical modification of atoms and 4th dimension softcore. (`#848 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/848>`_ `#992 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/992>`_)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Introduce ``RESTCapableHybridTopologyFactory``. Hybrid factory that allows for REST scaling, alchemical scaling, and 4th dimension softcore. (`#848 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/848>`_ `#992 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/992>`_)
```

> - New perses command line interface (CLI) using ``click``. Allowing a more friendly interface for users. It tests the running environment, sets the platform for the simulation and allows interactive overriding arbitrary options in the input YAML file. Former ``perses-relative`` CLI entry point is now deprecated (`#972 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/972>`_ `#1021 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/1021>`_ `#1027 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/1027>`_).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- New perses command line interface (CLI) `perses-cli` using ``click``. Allowing a more friendly interface for users. It tests the running environment, sets the platform for the simulation and allows interactive overriding arbitrary options in the input YAML file. Former ``perses-relative`` CLI entry point is now deprecated (`#972 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/972>`_ `#1021 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/1021>`_ `#1027 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/1027>`_).
```

> - Perses now supports handling charge changes in both proteins and ligands mutations. `#862 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/issues/862>`_ (`#973 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/973>`_).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Support for handling charge changes (by transforming a water into a counterion) for both protein mutations and ligands transformations. `#862 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/issues/862>`_ (`#973 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/973>`_).
```

- Hybrid topology factory class name can now be specified using the ``hybrid_topology_factory`` parameter in the input YAML file (`#988 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/988>`_).

> - Introduce ``unsampled_endstates`` boolean option in input YAML file, for enabling/disabling creation of unsampled endstates long-range sterics correction. Issue `#1033 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/issues/1033>`_ (`#1037 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/1037>`_).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Introduce ``unsampled_endstates`` boolean option in input YAML file, which enables/disables creation of unsampled endstates with long-range sterics correction. Issue `#1033 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/issues/1033>`_ (`#1037 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/1037>`_).
```

0.10.0 - Release
----------------

New command line interface (CLI), many enhancements for the API (especially the ``PointMutationExecutor``) and improved testing.

Bugfixes
^^^^^^^^

> - Bug in geometry engine when ``topology_index_map`` is None -- fixed by not trying to access it when its ``None``. (`#855 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/855>`_)

Reviewer 3: Can you describe the nature of the bug?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Bug in geometry engine's ``_determine_extra_torsions``: when ``topology_index_map``, which contains the atom indices involved in a particular torsion, is None -- fixed by not trying to add that torsion when ``topology_index_map`` is ``None``. (`#855 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/855>`_)
```

> - Bug generated by changes upstream in the ``openmm`` package -- fixed by adding more padding to the simulation box, it is now 1.1 nm. Openmm issue `#3502 <https://github.com/openmm/openmm/issues/3502>`_. Perses issue `#949 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/issues/949>`_ (`#953 <https://github.com/choderalab/perses/pull/953>`_)

Reviewer 3: Can you describe the nature of the bug?
